8185 keep on it.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Prince of Tennessee.
This is not a very pleasant matter to talk about, but it's a very important one.
I think it's one that people ought to have information about.
That is, in the case of a nuclear attack or an old-out war, what will happen to our civilian population?
What kind of civilian defense do we have?
Back about 10 or 12 years ago, as chairman of a subcommittee of the Armed Services Committee in the Senate,
guided through the First Civil Defense Act.
Since that time, we have seen many developments and a good deal has been done in the Civil Defense way.
I think that people, while they may not be interested, they don't like to think about civil defense particularly.
That this is a problem that they should have the most accurate and up-to-date information concerning,
because we never know what may unfortunately happen.
Today we have is our guest, Stuart L. Pitman, who is the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Civil Defense.
He is running the show at the federal level, coordinating or attempting to coordinate the activities throughout the country.
We appreciate having you here, Secretary Pitman, to talk with the listeners and viewers of this station about the all-important matter of civil defense.
Delighted to be here, Senator.
Now, in the first place, of course, you are a Assistant Secretary of Defense.
But is this a federal problem entirely, or is it not that we're going to be successful, I like the local aspects of it?
Well, on the way we picture a nuclear attack in the years ahead, a heavy nuclear attack seems quite clear that each community has to be prepared to stand on its own feet for a matter of perhaps weeks.
And they cannot be sure about side-help, so it's clearly a local problem.
And then, of course, the federal government does play a role in trying to coordinate the effort and help where you can, but it is a largely a local problem.
If it should ever happen, it would be very much a local problem, but in the preparations the federal government must support state and local efforts very heavily.
Well, Stewart, how much has the person asked for this year for civil defense in the budget?
Well, our request for fiscal year 1964 is 300 million.
It's less than was asked for last year, but a video more than we got last year.
How much did you get last year, and how much was spent on civil defense last year?
Last year, our appropriation was 113 million, and we are requesting a supplemental, which would increase that to 175 million for this current fiscal year.
Well, civil defense is an overall part of our defense program, is it not?
It's very much so.
And our overall defense program, I think, the budget this year is something like a 60, the request for appropriation is something like 60 billion dollars.
It's 52. It turns out to be 6 tenths of 1 percent of the total defense budget that we are requesting for civil defense.
I see. Well, I wasn't a secretary of McNamara requested in the way of civil defense legislation.
He's requesting legislation, which would permit us to start on the second leg of this program.
We found a shelter space for over 100 million people. It already exists.
There's no money need be spent on the structure. It simply has to be stock now, that's not enough to take care of the population with minimal shelter protection.
We need authority to put some money into selected buildings in communities to create additional shelter space, which would protect people against fallout radiation.
At present time, you found some kind of shelter space for about 100 million of our 180 million population.
Is that right? But how about supplies, medicine, food, water, things of that sort?
Supplies of that sort, as you have mentioned in an including radiation detection instruments,
going into each of the shelters that have been found to be acceptable in this survey, which we've just completed,
and they would also go into the new shelter space created by the program we're asking for.
Well, there's been a argument that's been raging for some time about the best way to save lives in case of nuclear attack.
Some have said that the shelters in our big cities offer the best opportunity of being protected against fallout.
Others have argued that we ought to vacuate our cities in the event of a warning of a nuclear attack, and get out in the country and the countryside.
What has been resolved about that? What should people do?
The one big change in civil defense planning over the last few years has been a shift away from the idea of evacuation towards a take cover approach to the problem.
This is largely because of the fallout radiation hazard we anticipate that under a heavy nuclear attack it would reach most of the country,
so there would be no place to run to. Unless you had a shelter at the end of your journey, you'd better stay where you are,
and take advantage of the massive building materials that are near where you live if you live in a city.
Certainly, it would be better to take advantage of that protection than to run out of the country where you'd be exposed to fallout radiation.
I mean, you're just the exposed value where running out and then you'd have to have somewhere to go to then after you.
I've got to have to evacuate it.
Well, aside from the war threat during the Cuban crisis, it doesn't seem to me that there's been very much,
and certainly not sufficient interest in civil defense. Is that right and what should be done about it?
Well, I think that is generally right, Senator Cuban experience, however, did demonstrate clearly to the leadership in this country,
and I mean local public and private leadership, not just the federal government, that people faced with a real crisis are deeply concerned about their chances of survival
and a place to go to take their families that would give them some protection. So that I don't think there's as much speculation as there was about whether people really want this.
I think it's clear that an emergency they wanted. It's also clear that between emergencies they're not going to think about it deeply and involve themselves emotionally in the problem.
I think this is all right. I think it's up to the leadership to do the planning and the general public has a responsibility to understand the problem,
but need not do extravagant and extraordinary things day-to-day basis. That's not necessary.
Well, Secretary Pitman, if you were living in a suburb of the city, or if you're living in a small town, a nuclear attack came, what should people do? What would you recommend they do?
Well, of course, anything you can do at the last minute is negligible compared to what you could do if you faced the problem a little ahead of time.
And every family in the suburbs or anywhere else should have some idea of the best protection against fallout radiation, which is the most predictable of the hazards that would take place.
That means a pick out of place, which might be a basement in your home, it might be a large building nearby.
If you don't have any place that offers any kind of protection, consideration should be given to a home shelter, and we have designs that have been published to show how this can be done.
It's very low cost or $150 if you do a little work yourself, put a shelter in your basement or backyard.
If this kind of preparation is taken, then you can build a family plan, a community plan that makes some sense. If these things haven't been done, it's a very difficult thing to advise people what to do during an emergency.
As far as the best and the first thing to do would be to try to get acquainted with the location of the facilities of some good shelter or well provision that's already been built that you could get to.
In Nashville, for example, in your state, we have found Sheller's base to take care of the entire population in Memphis, enough to take care of about half the population, so it varies from city to city.
Now, this is not evident, it hasn't come to the surface, it hasn't all been marked, so that people don't see this, but this is a reality in over this coming year, it will be stocked and marked, and there will be plans as to how people will use it.
People will know living in various sections of Nashville where they're supposed to go and what the shelter is available to them.
Yes, you have a very able state director and Colonel Fox who is working on plans to extract people.
Yes, I know, and he's got a lot of very able directors in our various cities and towns.
Well, now take our state of Tennessee with a population of three million, six hundred thousand, as an example.
What facts have your studies revealed about civil offense? How many shelter facilities are there, the number of spaces, and what's the status of the supply of food and water, other things that people must have?
The number of spaces that we've found in this nationwide survey in Tennessee are about one point space to take care of about one point six million people. That's about 45% of the state population.
The survey has also revealed that simply by adding ventilation and basements, you can increase the capacity of the shelter space in these larger buildings to about 2.4 million people, which means that about 70% of the population could be taken care of.
That's a 50% increase. This costs some money. The national average costs and the ventilation is around $11 per person's shelter.
Those institutions that are eligible under this proposed financing program that I mentioned earlier, which we're presenting to Congress, could have federal funds which would meet this cost.
These include all nonprofit institution schools and hospitals and public buildings. It does not include industrial commercial establishments.
What part of the TVA played in civil defense planning?
The TVA has taken a very active interest in this and done what all federal agencies should be doing, which is to demonstrate some leadership.
They have gone ahead and marked and equipped their buildings, which offer some possibility of community shelter space.
They've also taken measures to assure continuity of the power system and so far this can be done.
And in their own buildings or installations do they have civil defense and do they have shelters?
Yes, they have identified the buildings and moving in supplies and developing plants to use them.
I suppose having a power facility in the event of a attack is very important too.
It's vital. It's a very difficult subject as to how to switch power around from one station to another to restore services rapidly as possible.
We're doing a lot of research on this. We're optimistic that a good part of the country would have power.
Of course there would be important parts of the country that would be without power.
Well, I'll steer it briefly because you give us an example of a program supporting civil defense, which has been undertaken in the volunteer state in Tennessee.
Of course, you mean perhaps these prototype shelters that...
Or just no, perhaps, or any programs that have been initiated there.
I could describe one community which we've done some work with.
They've asked us to keep this quiet for the time being because they're not sure what they're going to do.
And the analysis has been made as to the shoulder space in the community and what they could do to survive under fallout conditions.
And the result has been to generate enthusiasm and a civic committee to pursue this.
So, I'm sorry, we'll have to talk about that some other time.
But thank you very much, Stuart Pittman, for coming and being with us until the next program is all.
Thank you very much.